Add skipscan howto (#968)
timescale/docs: timescaledb/how-to-guides/skipscan.md

# SkipScan

> SkipScan is a feature intended to vastly improve query times for `DISTINCT`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SkipScan improves query times for `DISTINCT`
```

> queries. Skip Scan works on PostgreSQL tables, TimescaleDB hypertables, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
queries. It works on PostgreSQL tables, TimescaleDB hypertables, and
```

TimescaleDB distributed hypertables. SkipScan is included in TimescaleDB 2.2.1
and above.

## About SkipScan
When you query your database to find the most recent value of an item, you

> usually use a `DISTINCT` query. For example, if you wanted to find the latest
> stock or cryptocurrency price for each of your investments, or you have graphs
> and alarms that repeatedly query the most recent values for every device or
> service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
usually use a `DISTINCT` query. For example, you might want to find the latest
stock or cryptocurrency price for each of your investments. Or you might have graphs
and alarms that repeatedly query the most recent values for every device or
service.
```

As your tables get larger, `DISTINCT` queries tend to get slower. This is
because PostgreSQL does not currently have a good mechanism for pulling a list
of unique values from an ordered index. Even when you have an index that matches
the exact order and columns for these kinds of queries, PostgreSQL scans the
entire index to find all unique values. As a table grows, this operation keeps
getting slower.

SkipScan allows queries to incrementally jump from one ordered value to the next
without reading all of the rows in between. Without support for this feature,
the database engine has to scan the entire ordered index and then de-duplicate
at the end, which is a much slower process.

<highlight type="note">
PostgreSQL has plans to implement a native feature like SkipScan, but it is
unlikely to be included until at least PostgreSQL&nbsp;15. This section
documents TimescaleDB SkipScan, which is not a native PostgreSQL feature.
</highlight>

SkipScan is an optimization for queries of the form `SELECT DISTINCT ON

> <column>`. Conceptually, SkipScan is a regular IndexScan that skips across an

Reviewer: The preview wasn't working so I tested it on a local build, and Gatsby seems to not like content in angle brackets within inline code. It seems to parse it as a component opening tag, then complain about the lack of ending tag.

For some reason, it works if formatted as a multi-line code block. Not sure of the fix here, might either have to rewrite without the angled brackets or page Jacob to see what can be done about the parsing.

> <column>`. Conceptually, SkipScan is a regular IndexScan that skips across an

Author: Ah, this might be what was causing the build problems @jacobprall saw. 

```suggestion
column_name`. Conceptually, SkipScan is a regular IndexScan that skips across an
```

index looking for the next value that is greater than the current value.

When you use a query with SkipScan, the `EXPLAIN` output includes a new node
that can quickly return distinct items from a properly ordered index. With an
IndexOnly scan, you have to scan the entire index, but SkipScan incrementally
searches for each successive item in the ordered index. As it locates one item,
the SkipScan node quickly restarts the search for the next item. This is a much

> more efficient way of finding distinct items in an ordered index.

Reviewer 2: I think we should replace "you" with PostgreSQL in this paragraph. Users don't use SkipScan, Postgres does.

I'd also show what the node looks like or explain "node" here. Not everyone understands that. I still call them "operators" because that's how SQL Server refers to them.

For benchmarking information on how SkipScan compares to regular `DISTINCT`
queries, see our [SkipScan blog post][blog-skipscan].

> ## Use SkipScan queries

Reviewer: Might help to make it clearer that the query planner chooses SkipScan, it's not something the user has to turn on, but these choices make it possible for the query planner to choose SkipScan

Otherwise, the user reader be wondering where they turn it on

> SkipScan is included in TimescaleDB 2.2.1 and above. This section describes how
> to set up your database index and query to use a SkipScan node.

Author: ```suggestion
SkipScan is included in TimescaleDB 2.2.1 and above. If your database index is set up correctly, then the query planner uses SkipScan automatically for appropriate queries. This section describes how
to set up your database index and query so that you can use a SkipScan node.
```

Author: @charislam ☝️ ??

Your index must:
* Contain the `DISTINCT` column as the first column.
* Be a `BTREE` index.
* Match the `ORDER BY` used in your query.

Your query must:
* Use the `DISTINCT` keyword on a single column.

If the `DISTINCT` column is not the first column of the index, ensure any
leading columns are used as constraints in your query. This means that if you
are asking a question such as "retrieve a list of unique IDs in order" and

> "retrieve the last reading of each ID," you need at least one index like this:

Reviewer 2: What you're describing isn't quite the same thing given the index below. I'd personally save this for later and just jump to the main use case for TimescaleDB users.

Most recent X ordered by time DESC.

What this paragraph is describing is when we might be searching for all "things" by a certain customer, and then we want to get the most recent reading by "thing". In that case you'd an index like this would still be used, first to filter on "customer" and then to SkipScan over the remaining portion of the index for that customer. (correct me if I'm wrong @svenklemm )

`CREATE INDEX "cpu_customer_tags_id_time_idx" ON readings (customer_id, tags_id, time DESC)`

```sql
"cpu_tags_id_time_idx" btree (tags_id, "time" DESC)
```

With your index set up correctly, you should start to see immediate benefit for
`DISTINCT` queries. When SkipScan is chosen for your query, the `EXPLAIN
ANALYZE` output shows one or more `Custom Scan (SkipScan)` nodes, like this:

> ```sql

Reviewer 2: Show the SQL query here.

# SkipScan
SkipScan improves query times for `DISTINCT` queries. It works on PostgreSQL
tables, TimescaleDB hypertables, and TimescaleDB distributed hypertables.
SkipScan is included in TimescaleDB 2.2.1 and above.

## Faster DISTINCT queries using SkipScan
When you query your database to find the most recent value of an item, you
usually use a `DISTINCT` query. For example, you might want to find the latest
stock or cryptocurrency price for each of your investments. Or you might have graphs
and alarms that repeatedly query the most recent values for every device or

> service.

Reviewer 3: Hmm i dont think this is actually true. I think you would almost never use a DISTINCT query here because the performance of that query would be really bad without skipscan optimization.

Author: ```suggestion
To query your database and find the most recent value of an item, you
could use a `DISTINCT` query. For example, you might want to find the latest
stock or cryptocurrency price for each of your investments. Or you might have graphs
and alarms that repeatedly query the most recent values for every device or
service.
```
